KPIs or key performance indicators,
are the metrics that you selected as
the most important metrics to track for your company.
At the end of the day, we want to build products that turn a profit.
This means that the KPIs you focus on as
a Data Product Manager should either directly or indirectly be linked to revenue.
Though all Product Managers share a need for such KPIs,
the way products make money varies depending on the business model.
This means the most common KPIs for a product also vary by business model.
In this section, we'll discuss three common business models,
eCommerce, freemium, and Software as a Service, or SaaS.
For each model, we'll learn how the business model is defined.
Then we'll discuss KPIs that best match these different models,
especially those KPIs most closely tied to revenue.
The eCommerce business model is
a traditional model of the sale of an item in exchange for payment.
Customers may buy one item from the business or may return and make many purchases.
Ecommerce is simply a brick and mortar business model with a storefront as online.
An example of traditional eCommerce business models is Amazon's online retail store.
Amazon is a large company and also makes money from other services and partnerships.
However, it's original business model consists
of selling items online to Amazon customers.
Unlike Amazon, Target has a large physical presence.
Its sales on target.com,
however provide an example of the eCommerce model.
A product manager for target.com would pay attention to
similar KPIs to purely online businesses.
KPIs for the eCommerce business model include the profit margin made on sale items.
That is, the payment the customer makes for an item
minus the cost to the business to produce or acquire the item.
Another KPI is the number of users purchasing items.
Since there is a limited number of customers in the world,
the number of customers who return and make multiple purchases.
The Software as a Service,
or SaaS business model,
provides customers with access to a software for a period of time.
In exchange for payment,
the user gets a software that is beneficial to them.
They have access to the software for as long as they are paying for the service.
Some older softwares, traditionally sold as a onetime lifetime purchase,
have now moved to the SaaS mode.
Instead of paying one time for lifetime access to Microsoft Word or Excel, for example,
Microsoft now allows users to pay
a monthly or yearly fee to access its suite of software products.
Adobe who software products include Photoshop and InDesign,
also operates under a Software as a Service model.
In the SaaS business model,
all full-time users are paying users.
This means key metrics to track would be the number of
paying users and the rate at which
those subscribers renew their subscriptions over a period of time.
If the subscription service includes a free trial,
the percent of users upgrading to a paid version would also be important to track,
as all of these KPIs would directly track revenue and potential revenue.
Because users of a SaaS product face a choice of whether to renew,
KPIs that indicate whether current users are likely to renew are also important.
By tracking user satisfaction,
product managers can know the extent to which subscribers are likely to renew.
More satisfied customers are more likely to renew.
This means tracking user satisfaction provides a leading indicator of
whether the renewal rate and number of subscribers is likely to go up or down.
In a similar vein of thinking,
the number of customer support tickets a SaaS product
receives is an indicator of user dissatisfaction.
An increase in the number and severity of customer support complaints is
a leading indicator that the renewal rate of subscribers might decrease.